hack/usoc23: Add session 01 - Overview of Unikraft (#276)
unikraft/docs: content/en/community/hackathons/usoc23/overview/index.md

---
title: Session 01 - Overview of Unikraft
linkTitle: Setting Up Unikraft
weight: 5
summary: |
  We present the setup. The students will use the scripts to run and test all the applications available.
  Expected time: 60 minutes
---

> ## Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set Up
```

You will need a Linux environment for this session.
You can use a virtual machine, but we recommend a native Linux install.

You will need to install the following packages:

* `build-essential` / `base-devel` / `@development-tools` (the meta-package that includes `make`, `gcc` and other development-related packages)
* `gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu`
* `sudo`
* `flex`
* `bison`
* `git`
* `wget`
* `uuid-runtime`
* `qemu-system-x86`
* `qemu-system-arm`
* `qemu-kvm`
* `sgabios`

On Ubuntu, Debian, and other `apt`-based distributions, you can use the following command to install the requirements:

```console
$ apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends \
        build-essential \
        sudo \
        gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu \
        libncurses-dev \
        libyaml-dev \
        flex \
        bison \
        git \
        wget \
        uuid-runtime \
        qemu-kvm \
        qemu-system-x86 \
        qemu-system-arm \
        sgabios
```

For running Unikraft with networking support, you will also need to configure QEMU to allow network bridge access:

```console
$ sudo mkdir /etc/qemu/
$ echo "allow all" | sudo tee /etc/qemu/bridge.conf
```

> ## Running `app-helloworld`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `app-helloworld` on Unikraft
```

The Unikraft `helloworld` application is located in [this repository](https://github.com/unikraft/app-helloworld), along with instructions on how to configure, build and run the application.

> We will go through them without focusing that much on the details, since we will see how everything works besides the scenes in the next sessions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will go through them without focusing that much on the details, since we will see how everything works behind the scenes in the next sessions.
```

For now, we just want to run and test some applications.

### Setting up the dependencies

The first step when building an application is to clone the dependencies.
For `app-helloworld`, the only thing we will need is the [Unikraft core](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/) and the [`helloworld` application](https://github.com/unikraft/app-helloworld).

> Other applications might require more external libraries, as we will see later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other applications might require  external libraries, as we will see later.
```

1. The first thing we do is clone the `app-helloworld` repository in the `helloworld/` directory:

    ```console
    $ git clone https://github.com/unikraft/app-helloworld helloworld
    $ cd helloworld/
    $ ls -F
    CODING_STYLE.md      config-qemu-x86_64  CONTRIBUTING.md  kraft.yaml  MAINTAINERS.md  Makefile.uk  README.md          run-qemu-x86_64*
    config-qemu-aarch64  Config.uk           COPYING.md       main.c      Makefile        monkey.h     run-qemu-aarch64*
    ```

1. While inside the `helloworld/` directory, we will create the `.unikraft/` directory:

    ```console
    $ mkdir .unikraft
    $ cd .unikraft/
    ```

1. While inside the `.unikraft/` directory, clone the [Unikraft core repository](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft):

    ```console
    $ git clone https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft unikraft
    ```

> 1. While sill inside the `.unikraft/` directory, we will create the `libs/` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. While still inside the `.unikraft/` directory, we will create the `libs/` directory.
```

   This will remain empty for now, as `app-helloworld` does not have any other external dependencies.

    ```console
    $ mkdir libs/
    ```

1. Get back to the `helloworld` directory:

    ```console
    $ cd ../
    ```

    If we use the `tree` command to inspect the contents of the `.unikraft/` directory, we should get something like this:

    ```console
    $ tree -L 2 -F .unikraft/
    .unikraft/
    |-- libs/
    `-- unikraft/
        |-- arch/
        |-- Config.uk
        |-- CONTRIBUTING.md
        |-- COPYING.md
        |-- include/
        |-- lib/
        |-- Makefile
        |-- Makefile.uk
        |-- plat/
        |-- README.md
        |-- support/
        `-- version.mk

    7 directories, 7 files
    ```

>     We are all set now, we can move on to configuring the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    With all being set, we can move on to configuring the application.
```

> ### Configuring the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure
```

Configuring, building and running a Unikraft application depends on our choice of platform and architecture.

> Currently, supported platforms are KVM, Xen and linuxu.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can say something about supported architectures too?

We will focus on using KVM (QEMU), on both `x86_64` and `AArch64`.

#### QEMU `x86_64`

We can use the `config-qemu-x86_64` configuration file together with `make defconfig` to create the configuration file:

```console
$ UK_DEFCONFIG=$(pwd)/config-qemu-x86_64 make defconfig
```

This results in the creation of the `.config` file:

```console
$ ls .config
.config
```

The `.config` file will be used in the build step.

#### QEMU `AArch64`

We can use the `config-qemu-aarch64` configuration file together with `make defconfig` to create the configuration file:

```console
$ UK_DEFCONFIG=$(pwd)/config-qemu-aarch64 make defconfig
```

Similar to the `x86_64` configuration, this results in the creation of the `.config` file that will be used in the build step.

> ### Building the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Build
```

> Building uses as input the `.config` file from above, and results in a unikernel image as output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building uses the `.config` file from above as input and produces a unikernel image as output.
```

The unikernel output image, together with intermediary build files, are stored in the `build/` directory.

#### Clean Up

Before starting a build on a different platform or architecture, you must clean up the build output.
This may also be required in case of a new configuration.

Cleaning up is done with 3 possible commands:

* `make clean`: cleans all actual build output files (binary files, including the unikernel image)
* `make properclean`: removes the entire `build/` directory
* `make distclean`: removes the entire `build/` directory **and** the `.config` file

Typically, you would use `make properclean` to remove all build artifacts, but keep the configuration file.

#### QEMU `x86_64`

Building for QEMU `x86_64` assumes we did the [QEMU `x86_64`](community/hackathons/usoc23/overview/#qemu-x86_64) configuration step above.
Build the Unikraft `helloworld` image for QEMU `x86_64` by using the command below:

```console
$ make -j$(nproc)
[...]
  LD      helloworld_qemu-x86_64.dbg
  UKBI    helloworld_qemu-x86_64.dbg.bootinfo
  SCSTRIP helloworld_qemu-x86_64
  GZ      helloworld_qemu-x86_64.gz

> make[1]: Leaving directory '/media/stefan/projects/unikraft/usoc23/helloworld/.unikraft/unikraft'

Reviewer 2: Maybe put a generic path here?

```

At the end of the build step, the `helloworld_qemu-x86_64` image is generated.
We will use this image in the run step.

### QEMU `AArch64`

If you had configured and build a unikernel image for another platform or architecture (such as `x86_64`) before, then:

1. Do a cleanup step with `make properclean`.

1. Configure for [QEMU `AAarch64`](community/hackathons/usoc23/overview/#qemu-aarch64), as shown above.

1. Follow the instructions below to build for QEMU AArch64.

Building for QEMU AArch64 assumes we did the [QEMU `AArch64`](community/hackathons/usoc23/overview/#qemu-aarch64) configuration step above.
Build the Unikraft `helloworld` image for QEMU `AArch64` by using the same command as for `x86_64`:

```console
$ make -j $(nproc)
[...]
  LD      helloworld_qemu-arm64.dbg
  UKBI    helloworld_qemu-arm64.dbg.bootinfo
  SCSTRIP helloworld_qemu-arm64
  GZ      helloworld_qemu-arm64.gz
make[1]: Leaving directory '/<path-to-workdir>/helloworld/.unikraft/unikraft'
```

Similarly to `x86_64`, at the end of the build command, the `helloworld_qemu-arm64` unikernel image is generated.
We will use this image in the run step.

> ### Running the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run
```

We can run the resulting image by using the `run-...` scripts.

#### QEMU `x86_64`

To run the QEMU `x86_64` build, use `run-qemu-x86_64.sh`:

```console
$ ./run-qemu-x86_64
SeaBIOS (version rel-1.16.2-0-gea1b7a073390-prebuilt.qemu.org)

iPXE (http://ipxe.org) 00:03.0 CA00 PCI2.10 PnP PMM+06FD1040+06F31040 CA00

Booting from ROM..Powered by
o.   .o       _ _               __ _
Oo   Oo  ___ (_) | __ __  __ _ ' _) :_
oO   oO ' _ `| | |/ /  _)' _` | |_|  _)
oOo oOO| | | | |   (| | | (_) |  _) :_
 OoOoO ._, ._:_:_,\_._,  .__,_:_, \___)
                  Atlas 0.13.1~5eb820bd
Hello world!
Arguments:  "build/helloworld_qemu-x86_64"
```

#### QEMU `AArch64`

To run the QEMU `AArch64` build, use `run-qemu-aarch64.sh`:

```console
$ ./run-qemu-aarch64
Powered by
o.   .o       _ _               __ _
Oo   Oo  ___ (_) | __ __  __ _ ' _) :_
oO   oO ' _ `| | |/ /  _)' _` | |_|  _)
oOo oOO| | | | |   (| | | (_) |  _) :_
 OoOoO ._, ._:_:_,\_._,  .__,_:_, \___)
                  Atlas 0.13.1~5eb820bd
Hello world!
Arguments:  "helloworld"
```

## Work Items

Now that you've seen how to run Unikraft `helloworld`, you can go through the list below, follow the same steps and try more applications.

> All the steps required for running the applications can be found in the app repository `README.md` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the steps required for running the applications can be found in the each app repository `README.md` file.
```

---
title: Session 01 - Overview of Unikraft
linkTitle: Setting Up Unikraft
weight: 5
summary: |

>   We present the setup. The students will use the scripts to run and test all the applications available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We present the initial steps in setting up the Unikraft development / usage environment. Students will use the basic Unikraft toolchain to set up, configure, build and run Unikraft images.
```

  Expected time: 60 minutes
---

## Set Up

We encourage you to split into teams of 5-6 people, we have the teams proposals [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1O17J63nHGo9ZVPQvDKCJbk2jUUB44D-rtyB1CmJlXFg/edit?usp=sharing), you can use the `#hack-team-XX-voice` channels on the [Discord server](https://bit.ly/UnikraftDiscord).
You will need a Linux environment for this session.
You can use a virtual machine, but we recommend a native Linux install.

You will need to install the following packages:

* `build-essential` / `base-devel` / `@development-tools` (the meta-package that includes `make`, `gcc` and other development-related packages)
* `gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu`
* `sudo`
* `flex`
* `bison`
* `git`
* `wget`
* `uuid-runtime`
* `qemu-system-x86`
* `qemu-system-arm`
* `qemu-kvm`
* `sgabios`

On Ubuntu, Debian, and other `apt`-based distributions, you can use the following command to install the requirements:

```console

> $ sudo apt install -y --no-install-recommends \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo apt install -y --no-install-recommends \
```

* `gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu`
* `sudo`
* `flex`
* `bison`
* `git`
* `wget`
* `uuid-runtime`
* `qemu-system-x86`
* `qemu-system-arm`
* `qemu-kvm`
* `sgabios`

On Ubuntu, Debian, and other `apt`-based distributions, you can use the following command to install the requirements:

```console
sudo apt install -y --no-install-recommends \
        build-essential \
        sudo \
        gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu \
        libncurses-dev \
        libyaml-dev \
        flex \
        bison \
        git \
        wget \
        uuid-runtime \
        qemu-kvm \
        qemu-system-x86 \
        qemu-system-arm \
        sgabios
```

For running Unikraft with networking support, you will also need to configure QEMU to allow network bridge access:

```console
sudo mkdir /etc/qemu/
echo "allow all" | sudo tee /etc/qemu/bridge.conf
```

## `app-helloworld` on Unikraft

The Unikraft `helloworld` application is located in [this repository](https://github.com/unikraft/app-helloworld), along with instructions on how to configure, build and run the application.
We will go through them without focusing that much on the details, since we will see how everything works behind the scenes in the next sessions.

> Go through the repository `README.md` file, starting with the [`#requirements` section](https://github.com/unikraft/app-helloworld/blob/staging/README.md#requirements).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go through the repository `README.md` file, starting with the [`Requirements` section](https://github.com/unikraft/app-helloworld/blob/staging/README.md#requirements).
```
